CASCADE BILBERRY
Vaccinium deliciosum Piper
plant symbol = VADE
Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data
Center & Oregon Plant Materials Center

Each family would harvest and store approximately
four or five pecks (ca. four to five gallons) of dried
berries for winter use (Perkins n.d. (1838-43), Book
1:10). Hunn (1990) estimates that there were 28-42
huckleberry harvest days in a year. This resulted in a
total annual harvest of 63.9-80.2 kg/woman/year
from the Tenino-Wishram area, and 90
kg/woman/year from the Umatilla area. The net
result was a huckleberry harvest yield of 31
kcal/person/day in the Tenino-Wishram area and 42
kcal/person/day for the Umatilla area (Hunn 1981:
130-131). Vaccinium species contain 622 Kcal per
100 gm huckleberries, with 15.3 gm carbohydrate,
0.5 gm fat, 0.7 gm protein and 83.2 gm water (Hunn
1981:130-131).
In the fall, after the harvest, it was common for the
Sahaptin to burn these areas to create favorable
habitat (Henry Lewis 1973, 1977). Fire creates
sunny openings in the forest and edges that foster the
rapid spread of nutritious herbs and shrubs that
favors the huckleberries (Minore 1972:68).

Jeanne Russell Janish
Used with permission of the publishers
 Stanford University
Abrams & Ferris (1960)

Alternate Names
Blue-leaf huckleberry, little huckleberry, Rainer
bilberry
Uses
Ethnobotanic: Traditionally, Cascade bilberry fruits
were eaten raw and fresh, or were cooked, mashed,
and dried in the sun in cakes. Columbia Plateau
Indians of Washington dried surplus berries slowly
over a fire kept smoldering in a rotten log (Filloon
1952). This method of drying the berries preserves
the bulk of the Vitamin C content in the fruits
(Norton et al. 1984:223). The dried berries are
sometimes mixed with pounded salmon and a good
portion of salmon oil, making a delicious dish.
After the huckleberry feast, the Sahaptin people of
the Columbia plateau traveled to the productive berry
fields higher in the mountains for a series of day,
overnight, or weekend trips. The knowledge of the
location of the berries is part of an Indian family's
inheritance (Hunn 1990). Special berry picking
baskets include "Klikitat baskets" of cedar root
decorated with bear grass and bitter cherry bark.

The leaves and berries are high in vitamin C. The
leaves and finely chopped stems contain quinic acid,
a former therapeutic for gout said to inhibit uric acid
formation but never widely used because of mixed
clinical results. The leaves have been widely used to
lower or modify blood sugar levels. Many herbalists
maintain that bilberry-leaf tea may be useful in
stabilizing blood sugar levels in cases of diabetes,
and medical research has shown that consumption of
the leaf extract decreases blood sugar levels shortly
after administration. Taken on regular basis, bilberry
tea will gradually help alleviate both glycosuria and
hyperglycemia and has a benign but useful effect as
an adjunct treatment to diabetes mellitus. The leaves
are believed also to stimulate appetite, and have
astringent and antiseptic qualities that are useful in
urinary disorders.
Other Uses: Cascade bilberry has a particularly sweet
berry, and is prized for its flavor. The berries are
eaten fresh, baked in pancakes, pies, and muffins,
canned, frozen, or made into jams and jellies. Berries
are usually picked in late July or August. The leaves
can be used fresh or dried to make a tea.
Elk and deer browse the foliage of cascade bilberry.
Flowers attract butterflies and other insects. For
several species of grouse, huckleberries and
bilberries are among the most important summer and
early fall foods. Chipmunks, black bear, mice,
scarlet tanagers, bluebirds, thrushes, and other

songbirds eat berries. Deer and rabbit browse freely
on the plants.
Description
General: Heath Family (Ericaceae). Cascade
bilberry is a low, bushy shrub less that 4-dm tall.
The branches are slightly angled; young branches are
grayish and minutely pubescent, turning purplish
with age. The leaves are obovate, 2-4 cm long, finely
dentate, very glaucous, and rounded at the apex. The
flowers are solitary, pinkish, urn-shaped blossoms in
the axils of the leaves. The dusky blue berries are >
9 mm in diameter.
Distribution
For current distribution, please consult the Plant
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web
site. Cascade bilberry grows in alpine meadows,
subalpine coniferous woods, and near the coast at
elevations from 600-2000 m. The range of
Vaccinium deliciosum is from southern British
Columbia to northern California, in the Klamath
Range and the northern high Sierra Nevada
Mountains.
Establishment
Live Plant Collections: Take cuttings from rhizomes
in early spring or late summer and autumn. Dig up
the rhizomes and cut them into lengths of 10 cm or
longer. Place the cuttings in vermiculite at 21° C.
Once the roots are established and meristematic
activity is initiated, the small cuttings may be moved
to individual pots with a peat sand soil mixture (1:1)
potting soil. The soil should be kept fairly moist.
When the plants are of a desired size, they can be
planted in areas with moist soils and partial shade.
Seed Collections: Collect the berries in late summer
or early fall. Clean the seeds by macerating in water,
floating off the pulp, then allow the seeds to dry.
Seeds require no stratification and can be sown on a
moist peat surface. Temperatures of 18° C (for 12
hours) during the day and 13° C (for 12 hours) are
ideal for germination. Seven weeks after
germination, change temperatures to 20° C (for 14
hours) and 14° C (for 10 hours). Fertilize seedlings
10 weeks after germination. After the seedlings are
12 weeks old, transplant to a peat sand (1:1) media in
individual pots (Minore and Smart 1978). The soil
should be kept fairly moist.
Management
This plant grows very rapidly in moist, shady
conditions. If summer drought occurs, the plants
should be watered so roots are kept fairly moist.

Traditional Resource Management: Management of
this plant includes the following: 1) occasional
burning to stimulate new growth; pruning the
branches after picking the berries to stimulate new
growth and fruit production the next growing season;
and 3) ownership of cascade bilberry shrubs provides
the basis for careful tending and sustainable yield of
valued resources.
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and
area of origin)
Please check the Vendor Database, expected to be
on-line through the PLANTS Web site in 2001 by
clicking on Plant Materials. This plant is available
from some native plant nurseries within its range.
References
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960. Illustrated flora of
the Pacific states. Stanford Univ. Press, Palo Alto,
California.
Cooke, S.S. 1997. A field guide to the common
wetland plants of western Washington and
northwestern Oregon. Seattle Audubon Society and
Washington Native Plant Society. 414 pp.
Crossley, J.A. 1974. Vaccinium L. blueberry. pp.
840-843 IN: Shopmeyer, C.S. (tech. coord.) 1974.
Seeds of the Woody Plants in the United States.
USDA, Forest Service, Agric. Handbook 450,
Washington, D.C. 883 pp.
Crowley, D.J. 1933. Observations and experiments
with blueberries in western Washington. State
College of Washington. Agricultural Experiment
Station. Bull. 276. 20 pp.
Filloon, R.M. 1952. Huckleberry pilgrimage.
Pacific Discovery 5(3):4-13.
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973. Ethnobotany of western
Washington. University of Washington Publications
in Anthropology, 10(1). University of Washington
Press, Seattle, Washington.
Gilkey, H.M. & L.J. Dennis 1980. Handbook of
northwestern plants. Oregon State University
Bookstores, Inc., Corvallis, Oregon. 507 pp.
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993. The Jepson manual.
Higher plants of California. University of California
Press. 1399 pp.
Hunn, E.S. 1990. Nch'i-Wana "The Big River" MidColumbia Indians and their land. University of
Washington Press, Seattle and London. 378 pp.

Hunn, E.S. 1981. On the relative contribution of men
and women to subsistence among hunter-gatherers of
the Columbia Plateau: A comparison with
ethnographic atlas Summaries. Journal of
Ethnobiology 1:124-34.
Isaacson, R.T. 1993. Anderson horticultural library's
source list of plants and seeds. Anderson
Horticultural Library, University of Minnesota
Libraries, and Minnesota Landscape Arboretum. 261
pp.
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991. Traditional plant
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples. Nutrition,
botany, and use. Food and Nutrition in History and
Anthropology Volume 8. Gordon and Breach
Science Publishers. 632 pp.

economies of the Pacific Northwest. Ecology of
Food and Nutrition 14:219-228.
Peck, M.E. 1961. A manual of the higher plants of
Oregon. Binfords & Mort, Portland, Oregon. 936
pp.
Perkins, H.K.W. no date (1838-1843). "Diary and
letters." Edited by Robert T. Boyd. Manuscript,
Pacific Lutheran University, Tacoma, Washington.
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D. Haase 1998.
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants.
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, Oregon.
Schopmeyer, C.S. 1974. Seeds of woody plants in
the United States. USDA, Forest Service,
Agriculture Handbook No. 450, Washington, D.C.
Pages 840-843.

Leigh, M. (August) 1997. Grow your own native
landscape: A guide to identifying, propagating, and
landscaping with western Washington native plants.
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington
State Department of Ecology, and Washington State
University Cooperative Extension.

Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson and
A.Z. York 1990. Thompson ethnobotany:
Knowledge and usage of plants by the Thompson
Indians of British Columbia. Royal British Columbia
Museum Memoirs No. 3, Victoria, British Columbia.

Lewis, H. 1973. Patterns of Indian burning in
California: Ecology and ethnohistory.
Anthropological Papers No. 1. Ballena Press,
Ramona, California.

Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson & R.T. Ogilvie
1983. Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of
Vancouver Island. Bristish Columbia Provincial
Museum Occasional Paper No. 24, 165 pp.

Lewis, H. 1977. Maskuta: The ecology of Indian
fires in northern Alberta. Western Canadian Journal
of Anthropology 7:15-52.

Turner, N.J. & B.S. Efrat 1982. Ethnobotany of the
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island. British
Columbia Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery
Paper No. 2, 99 pp.

Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.
American wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife
food habits. Dover Publications, Inc., New York,
New York. 500 pp.
Minore, D. & A.W. Smart 1978. Frost tolerance in
seedlings of Vaccinium membranaceum, Vaccinium
globulare, and Vaccinium deliciosum. Northwest
Science 52(3):179-185.
Minore, D. 1972. The wild huckleberries of Oregon
and Washington - A dwindling resource. USDA,
Forest Service Research Paper No. 143, Portland,
Oregon.
Moore, Michael. 1979. Medicinal plants of the
mountain west. Museum of New Mexico Press. 200
pp.
Norton, H.H., E.S. Hunn, C.S. Martinsen, & P.B.
Keely 1984. Vegetable food products of the foraging

Turner, N.J. 1978. Food plants of British Columbia
Indians. Part II. Interior peoples. British Columbia
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria,
British Columbia.
Turner, N.J. 1975. Food plants of British Columbia
Indians. Part I. Coastal peoples. British Columbia
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria,
British Columbia.
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan & S.
Hashisaki 1994. A citizen's guide to wetland
restoration. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Region 10. 71 pp.
Young, J.A. & C.G. Young 1987. Collecting,
processing, and germinating seeds of wildland
plants. Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. Page 135.

Prepared By
Michelle Stevens
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center
Dale C. Darris
USDA, NRCS, Oregon Plant Materials Center,
Corvallis, Oregon
Species Coordinator
M. Kat Anderson
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center
c/o Environmental Horticulture Department,
University of California, Davis, California
Edited 04dec00 jsp

For more information about this and other plants, please contact
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the
PLANTS <http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program
Web sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all
its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin,
gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and
marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication
of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact
USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil
Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW,
Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA
is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

